# RISC-V Verification Interface (RVVI)

-----
## About

When verifying RISC-V CPU RTL in a Verilog simulator, interfaces are needed
between the core RTL, the test bench, and other verification components.

Each RISC-V core being designed so far has implemented its own specific bespoke
interfaces for the specific core and the various verification components, and
has required a specific bespoke test bench. This means with each design, all
components, and test bench having their own custom interfaces there is very
little re-use that can be made and the process is inefficient and time
consuming. More effort goes into testing than design and so it is essential
going forward to make the hardware design verification (HW DV) process as
efficient as possible.

The RISC-V Verification Interface (RVVI) is a draft open standard that defines a
number of interfaces required to bring together several of the subsystems
required for RISC-V processor DV.

By adopting these standards, components can be created that can be re-used
across different design teams within a company, across different companies, and
also for open source components to be developed, made available, and be included
easily.

Of course, if DV components use these standards as they are developed for one
design, they can be easily used for subsequent designs in one team.

In short, standards such as RVVI make re-use possible for RISC-V processor DV.

Use of RVVI is not just of benefit for test bench re-use but also for test
generators, functional coverage, and other testing methodologies.


![Testbench For Advanced RISC-V Design Verification](diagrams/TestbenchForAdvancedRISC-VDesignVerification.png)


Currently there are 3 different areas that RVVI addresses:


-----
## The core (Device Under Test) RTL Trace interface - RVVI-TRACE

Version 1.5

First is the interface to the internals of the RTL of the core's
micro-architecture to provide values, state, and events related to the internal
signals up to several of the test bench components. Traditionally this was done
to provide tracing capabilities such as for log file writing. In the past, this
interface or similar has been used to create a 'tracer'.

The RVVI-TRACE interface includes capabilities for use with simple single hart
in-order cores to multi-hart, multi-issue, Out-of-Order, cores with asynchronous
interrupts, and debug modes etc.

Another feature of the RVVI-TRACE interface is to allow net changes observed by
the RISC-V core to be propagated to consumers of the RVVI-TRACE interface.

The RVVI-TRACE interface is defined in SystemVerilog.

Specification: [RVVI-TRACE Verilog](RVVI-TRACE/README.md)


-----
## The reference model DV subsystem interface - RVVI-API

Version  1.34

To verify a RISC-V core requires comparison of the Device Under Test (DUT)
against a reference model. This is not as simple as just running programs on the
reference and DUT and comparing PC values - it needs to take into account all
ISA architectural features and options including full asynchronous operation.

The RVVI-API interface is a set of API function calls that abstract away many of
the details of the operation of processor reference models and decouples the
test bench from any specific reference model.

The RVVI-API is a C/C++ API and can be used with C/C++ test benches. RVVI-API
also is defined with a SystemVerilog DPI wrapper to be used in SystemVerilog
test benches.

Specification: [RVVI-API reference model subsystem API](RVVI-API/README.md)


-----
## The Virtual Verification Peripherals used in the test bench - RVVI-VVP

Version  0.0

When testing a processor there are components needed in the test bench to
interact with the processor - for example a virtual UART to print information
from the program operation, and timers to generate asynchronous interrupts.

These components are being defined so that they can be used in C/C++,
SystemVerilog, test benches, and also in some cases within ISS - to allow ease
of test creation.

This RVVI-VVP is currently a work in progress and is looking cover: timers,
interrupts, debug, random event generators, and printer/log/UART capabilities.

Specification: [RVVI-VVP Virtual Verification Peripheral](RVVI-VVP/README.md)


-------
## History

This work has evolved from the experience by Imperas, EMMicro, and SiLabs
working with several RISC-V verification projects including collaboration with
OpenHW Group (https://github.com/openhwgroup/core-v-verif) on the Core-V range
of open-source RISC-V cores.

There is the RISC-V Formal Interface (RVFI)
(https://github.com/SymbioticEDA/riscv-formal) from SymbioticEDA which is a very
good interface for providing observation into a running core by streaming what
is executing on the core (i.e. the basic tracer functionality) - but for quality
RISC-V processor DV more is needed. Hence the need for RVVI. The RVVI-TRACE
interface has some parts very similar to the RVFI formal interface and RVVI can
be thought of as a superset of RVFI.


--------------
## Implementations and usage

[Imperas](https://www.imperas.com/imperasdv) provides examples of use of RVVI
with its ImperasDV product with C/C++ for Verilator designs and SystemVerilog
for use with Xcelium, VCS, Questa from Cadence, Synopsys, Siemens EDA
respectively.

[OpenHW](https://www.openhwgroup.org/) are using RVVI in its
[CV32E40X](https://github.com/openhwgroup/core-v-verif/tree/master/cv32e40x)
open source SystemVerilog test bench.
